battalion there. Actually one time we had a
battalion at the Ordnance Depot at Texarkana,
Arkansas and one at Fort Polk, Louisiana and our
brigade headquarters was at Fort Chaffee. So I
would use our helicopters or air transportation
to visit both places, spend a day or two each week
with the other battalions. We would visit and then
the other battalions would be report to active
duty some other time at some other place. Might
have been at Fort McCoy, Wisconsin, Camp Perry,
Ohio, various places. We went wherever the Army
sent us.
And nearly every year We would have somebody in the
Washington area. So you went where the Army needed
the skills? Sure.
We might have something to do with choosing our
post camper station because we would try to
determine once Fifth Army headquarters would
notify us of what the possibilities were. We would
check to see what the suitability of the
facilities and the projects available were so
that we could confer then with the commanding
general of the Army Readiness Region or Fifth Army
about the suitability of this. If there were more
than one possibility, well, we would have a chance
to exercise some
selectivity based upon the training that would be
available. And also based upon what we considered
to be the interest of the troops in going there.
Because of course we were always interested in
having them reenlist in the reserves. trying to
use this as a recruiting advantage when
recruiting got tough. What kind of things would
you look forward or look for in the interest of the
troops? Well we would look for what sort of support
facilities would be available on the post. Post
exchange facilities, service clubs.
Cafeterias. Theaters. things for off-duty
entertainment of the troops. And even more
important than that, we looked for what was
available to support the training projects. That
is, did the post engineer have all the materials we
needed for the various kind of construction
projects? Were we able to do dirt work? vertical
construction, exercise, all of the skills,
carpenters, electricians, plumbers,
everything. So these men could use the skills that
they had. Absolutely. Oh yeah. And so they'd do
things that weren't just make work. Absolutely.
And you know I commanded an artillery battalion
and of course when we got through and left was there
wasn't anything left behind. Right. We were, we
had a destruction mission so I liked the engineer
Yeah. Activities, because when we left, you could
see what was done there could be attributed
forever to the unit that did the construction. So
they took quite a lot of pride in that. Yeah. I would
think so. Let's talk about the growth. During the
1970s, of course, this is another period in which
there is a draft, a very active draft. And of
course, the war in Vietnam. Did your command, did
the numbers of your command grow, or did the
waiting lines increase? Well, the all-volunteer
Army time, let's see, I don't remember a draft
period in the 70s. We've registered for the draft
right now, but I don't remember. Drafted until
about 62. Yeah, but you said 70s. Yeah, I mean 72.
Drafted until about 72, I mean. And then we get the
all-volunteer. About 73 we get the
all-volunteer. Well, during the draft period,
we were in much better position.
And we weren't near as good then as we were in the 50s
because the likelihood of actually being
conscripted was much lower during that period
than it was during the 50s. So people were much more
willing to take a chance, one in a thousand or
something that they might be drafted. And of
course with the old volunteer army and denial of
our being able to use the ROTC cadet. We were
restricted on that. Oh, when did that come about? I
don't remember exactly.
But it was based on a principle that a cadet
couldn't draw off two checks from the federal
government or something like that. Anyhow, we got
to the point where we couldn't use the ROTC cadets
anymore. Must have been about the mid-1970s. I
don't know when it was. I think it was earlier than
that. That dried up a major source of outstanding
young people. And during the old Volunteer Army,
we've had to devote an untold amount of time to
recruiting, and it was just sort of a declining
proposition all the time. And of course, until
today, apparently all of the units are
substantially understrength, including the
active Army units. Actually, shortly after I
left, the very last duty I performed is go to advise
the chief staff of the United States Army about
recruiting in Army reserves. They had an
intention to take away the recruiting
responsibility from the reserves themselves
with the support people we had of civilian type,
civil service people. and turn over the
recruiting responsibility to the recruiting
command. And I tried as hard as I could to persuade
them not to do that, but they did it anyway. Okay,
why did you want, what was at issue here? Why did you
want them not to do that? Well, we were the best in
the 5th Army at recruiting in our particular
brigade. We had dedicated people, civil service
type. And I just didn't figure that anybody else
would have as strong an interest in our success as
we did ourselves. And of course it was a point of
pride to us that we were the most successful
recruiting unit, major unit in the whole Fifth
Army. Which went all the way up to Michigan. The
Fifth Army was just one of three Continental
armies, so there were a lot of units in it. We, of any
major command, we had the best recruiting
success. We worked at it real hard.
And so you didn't want the
federal, or you didn't want the Washington people
to take over? Well, they weren't based in
Washington, but the recruiting command was based
in Illinois.
We were given fairly substantial resources to do
this job. A
group of dual service people that were full time
employees on a civil service basis, but they also
functioned in the Army Reserves in most cases, you
see. And we had recruited some fine people into
that. These people were well led, fairly well
supported with resources. so I just didn't want to
lose all the resources, the people, the momentum
would build up, sure. Now let's talk about the
numbers. New York Command, 1971, how many in the
420th, how many men and officers did you have and
then when you retired, how many did you have? Well
the authorized strength was some 4,400. That
fluctuated a little bit, but it was around. 4,000
people. They were located in four states,
headquarters here at Bryan. There was some little
change over time. A petroleum unit was moved out.
We gained some, lost some, but there wasn't any
substantial change during any time I was assigned
to the brigade. And authorized strength Didn't
vary much. But did actual strength vary? I mean, in
1971 you had approximately 4,400. How many did you
have? Well, that was what was authorized, and we
were full strength then, and yes, our units
fluctuated quite a bit. We did pit one against
another, but they ranged in strength from, let's
say, 70% to some over 100% strength. So we see
approximately a 30% decline then? No, no, no, no.
I'm talking about individual units. Oh, okay.
When I retired, I think that the entire brigade was
about 90%, a little over 90% strength. So it
declined from 100%. Sure. And actually after the
90th Division was deactivated, it was up well over
100%. You see with the overstrength that they
picked up from the 90th division and it had
declined to somewhere in the lower 90s in
strength. Okay, then the end of the draft and the
all-volunteer service then didn't seem to have
that much of a manpower impact on your command, did
it? Well, it had a strong impact because it took so
much of our attention, so much of our resources to
maintain recruiting and retention effort. Oh, I
see. To keep your numbers up. Yes, to keep the
numbers up. And we had our retention rate on
reenlistment
Now I'm wondering about the relations that your
reserve unit, engineering unit had with the
regular Corps of Engineers. Can you tell me about
that? Well sure, we of course were commanded by the
Army Readiness Region and the Fifth Army, For
technical purposes, we were affiliated directly
with the chief engineers, so we were
authorized to maintain liaison with the chief
engineers. The chief engineers would have a
meeting every year of all of the major commanders
of the Army Reserve units.
We're affiliated with the Corps Engineer at Fort
Hood.
We were fairly free to establish liaison with
engineer units as needed or required. Did you ever
do any work in this area on any of the Corps of
Engineer projects like Somerville or anything
like that?
We used the Lake Somerville reservoir area
sometimes for weekend exercises, but as far as
construction projects there, we did not. There
are 19 core reservoirs in this state. We did have
liaison with the Dallas region, let's see, Dallas
region, Fort Worth region, Dallas District
Engineers. This is a construction supervision
group. We established liaison with them and we did
some projects for them but not at Fort Somerville.
We drilled some wells. We have well running
detachment and we have drilled some wells for them
where they would furnish the materials and we
would use our equipment. And we've done some other
minor construction projects on Corps of
Engineers reservoirs. For instance, Canyon
Lake. We did quite a bit of construction around
Canyon Lake when we had units at Camp Willis. And
actually we had some that did their entire two
weeks of training right at Canyon
We had a very wide variety of things. I know one year
we were at Fort Chaffee. We drilled a water well for
one of the little towns near Fort Chaffee.
Now during the years that you were in command,
there was a great change going on in American
society, especially toward women and blacks.
Were there more women and more blacks came into the
reserves under your command during those years?
Well early on during my command we were very
successful in recruiting women.
There were certain military occupational
specialties that we were authorized to assign
them to. After a year of fairly good success at that
we had an about face on policy and we had to to
relieve the women assigned to our combat units.
For instance, our combat battalion in Arkansas
had maybe as many as 75 women altogether. We were
required to reassign them to headquarters units
and non-combat type units. So as reservists, you
had assigned women to combat units? Yes. And what?
What year's release? Non-combat military
occupational specialties in combat units. Oh, I
see. I see. OK, so what kind of specialty would they
do? What non-combat specialty would they do in
these combat units? Clerk, supply specialists.
Get the supplies to the mount. Take care of
personnel. Personnel matters, headquarters
things. Now why were they reassigned? Well it was
policy, a changed policy of the Department of
Defense and Department of Army.
And they could not do any of it? We thought it was
related some to the resistance to assignment of,
to admission of women to West Point at that time. It
was great, great resistance to that at the time and
that's the reason they were keeping them out then
That's what they were using for the primary
justification is that women were not suitable for
combat. We thought that was the main thing that
caused them to change their policy about allowing
these women to be in combat units. As far as blacks
are concerned, that varied quite a lot depending
upon where the units were located. Some of our
Louisiana units had a fairly high percentage of
blacks. And to some extent on where the reserve
center was, where our unit was established. If it
was in a neighborhood that was primarily a
minority neighborhood blacks, well we'd have a
pretty high percentage of blacks in the units. We
never had any problem with meeting our goals on
percentage of minorities in units. of course in
our units that were in an area where there was a
fairly high percentage of Latin Americans, well
we'd have a lot of Latin Americans in the reserve
unit. Now did those numbers increase over the
years? The number of blacks and the number of
women? The number of blacks increased The women
increased early, but then after we were denied the
opportunity to assign combat units, it
decreased. That is the number we had decreased.
Any problems with the blacks or women in the
reserves? No problems at all with the women.
Actually, the enlistment requirements were
somehow for female and for male.
I believe they had just a little more
responsibility and dedication than the Army
Preserve soldier. I was very pleased with the
performance of the females in the Army Preserve.
The blacks were very variable. In our Louisiana
unit, a good many of them were category four on
their mental tests.
could barely read and write at all. Some used the
reserves as a means of getting into the army. The
reserves could take people with lower mental
qualifications than the active army could, but if
they got in the reserves and then failed to meet
some of their commitments, like attendance at
active duty for training, after they missed so
many times the punishment was to put them in the
Army. Really? For a 45 day period or whatever, and
of course that's what they were looking for
anyway. So we resented the fact that too many of
them used the reserves as a means of getting around
the stricter requirements for a prisoner in the
active army.
We did have some problems with the clannishness of
the blacks and whites. Never any race riots or
anything like that. But I would say that the
cooperation between blacks and whites varied by
geographical location units.
Cooperation was better or worse in what
geography? It was worse in Louisiana than it was in
Texas.
Worse in some units in Arkansas.
The higher the percentage of blacks we had, the
less likely it would that there'd be close
cooperation.
And I'd have to say based upon their background,
leaders in the units would more likely be 80 or 90%
whites. So I'm sure there was some resentment
about that. Though I'd say that we carefully tried
to avoid any discrimination on the basis of race,
but we did try to pick the best qualified people to
be in the leadership roles or for promotion.
due to quite a lot of difference in the background
and training that the whites were more likely to be
qualified on the basis of education and
performance in jobs where education was a factor.
What's your opinion of drafting women?
I've had real good experience with women in the
Army Reserve organizations. I have not had any
experience with them under a combat situation.
They have been tested that way.
They have, of course, not surprisingly been found
to be somewhat deficient in stamina and strength.
But as far as dedication and courage and
performance, I think they're fully up to the men. I
think they tended to play a role, but the ones that I
was associated with, of course, were volunteers
and they were inclined
I hate to generalize on it 100% because I just
haven't had that much experience. I'm pretty
certain that in today's environment in the United
States
that there will be some sort of draft for women as
well as for men. All of the emphasis on equal
rights, that has to be a reflection of that. Would
you agree with that? I suppose it would. What about
drafting women into combat roles?
I'm not sure. I have mixed emotions about that. Of
course we saw them perform combat roles in the
Russian Army and in some cases in the German Army,
so we know darn well they can do it.
But I'd rather see us under tremendous stress
before we did that to any great degree. Not only
women, but people my age, too. We saw those served
in the German Army. We know that in the event of full
mobilization that you're not nearly as selective
on aid use. We need to take advantage of the
tremendous experience of people that have been in
the armed forces in that case.
You made it to the rank of general. Perhaps you can
give me some ideas on this. How does one get ahead in
the military? Is it the same or similar as getting
ahead in civilian life, or are there differences?
Oh, I think it's the same characteristics
that you would look for in a civilian.
In your career, did you think that Getting ahead
depended on your performance or help from others?
Both. Your own performance and certainly nobody
gets
extremely high rank in either military or
civilian without a lot of help from others.
There has to be, I presume, In any case, some
element of luck, but it takes a lot of preparation.
Which is more important? Preparation. I forgot
who it was that said, I found that the harder I work,
the luckier I am. That's a good one. I like that.
That's a good one. Would you have considered
yourself ambitious? Sure. Still ain't.
In what way? Well, I like to satisfy
myself with whatever I might undertake to do. Can
be performed
a little above the expectations of those to whom I
report.
That's a matter of self-satisfaction, I guess.
Sure. Speaking of your command, again, and your
entire military career, and every man's life
who's spent a number of years, three decades,
doing something, there's always
accomplishments. There's also always
shortcomings. Not probably failures, but things
that you wanted to do that for some reason you just
couldn't do. Would you discuss your
accomplishments and your shortcomings?
Well, in accomplishments, I have always gotten a
tremendous amount of satisfaction out of the
progress and recognition of those for whom I am
responsible, whether on the civilian side or the
military side. So I got a real ego boost when those
that I might have had something to do with training
have responsibility for to excel and are
recognized for it.
I'm proud of the performance of the military units
to which I was assigned. I think without exception
they were above average to exceptional units.
And that gave me a lot of satisfaction. And of
course the capabilities of units are measured in
fairly in what you would say objective ways by the
Army. We tested regularly and we were able to meet
the test, so I like that.
I suppose for shortcomings, one of the things I
hoped to do was to earn for the 420th Engineer
Brigade, such high recognition that the
Department of Army would designate it as an
engineer command, which would qualify for the
rank of Major General, Brigadier General. And I
failed in that. Johanna were before me and I tried
to perform in such a way that of the four major
engineer units in the United States, two were
brigades and two were commands. We were never able
to arrest one of those commands away from the
headquarters in Mississippi or headquarters in
Chicago, Illinois. Of course, we consoled
ourselves that that was politics rather than
merit. I don't know, anyhow we weren't able to get
the job done and that was a disappointment to me.
Most of the other disappointments I had as it
turned out in the military proved to be just good
luck. I was disappointed not to be promoted to
lieutenant colonel before 1953. If I had been, I
would have Probably gone to Colonel earlier and
served my time in grade and then relieved from
active duty before I had a chance to get a star.
There were two or three instances like that where
what at the time looked like a disadvantage proved
later to be an advantage.
I'd say other than that, one of my great
disappointments was getting wounded in a way that
there was really not any excuse for, so I failed to
wind up the entire combat mission in Europe.